This brief explains the common law of birthright subjectship and its application to unlawfully present aliens and temporary sojourners. It further explains the connection between the common-law rule and the jurisdictional language of the Fourteenth Amendment. It makes four principal points.

First, mere birth on the sovereign’s soil has never been the rule for birthright subjectship or citizenship. Rather, the rule has always been birth in the realm to parents under the sovereign’s protection, in exchange for which the parents owed the sovereign allegiance. “Nothing is better settled at the common law than the doctrine that the children even of aliens born in a country, while the parents are resident there under the protection of the government, and owing a temporary allegiance thereto, are subjects by birth.” Inglis v. Trustees of Sailor’s Snug Harbor, 28 U.S. 99, 164 (1830) (concurring opinion of Story, J.) (emphasis added). This exchange of allegiance and protection was often described as a “mutual compact.” Lawful aliens generally fell within the scope of the rule, while foreign soldiers and ambassadors did not.

Second, illegally present aliens would likely have fallen outside the scope of the rule. Throughout English history, aliens, to be under the king’s “protection,” required the sovereign’s express permission to enter the realm through a formal “safe-conduct” or through statutory permission. For example, Magna Carta extended protection to all aliens from friendly nations, but not if “they have been previously and publicly forbidden.” Magna Carta ch. 30 (1297). The bottom line: without safe-conduct or statutory permission, aliens would not have been under the protection of the king and would not have entered a mutual compact with the sovereign. Any child born would not have been a birthright subject. 

Third, the case of temporary sojourners is more difficult. Temporary sojourners were under the protection of the king and therefore their children would arguably have been considered birthright subjects. Leading up to the Fourteenth Amendment, however, several American authorities argued the common law did not or should not apply to temporary visitors, particularly because increased international travel resulted in many double allegiances. Justice Joseph Story and Henry St. George Tucker, in treatises, suggested that the rule should, or did, exclude temporary visitors. Others thought so, too, including Louisiana military authorities during the Civil War and the leading drafters of the Civil Rights Act and Fourteenth Amendment.

Fourth, the legal effect of the jurisdictional language of the Fourteenth Amendment is likely consistent with the narrower rule. Many officials and commentators thought that temporary visitors were not subject to the “complete” jurisdiction of the United States in the sense of the amendment. Antebellum evidence also suggests some respects in which unlawfully present aliens are not fully subject to U.S. jurisdiction in the sense of the constitutional rule. That is because protection was a condition precedent to jurisdiction. 